---
layout: post
tags: non-project linux
title: Woe, Broadcom be upon ye - Follow up
---

A few days ago I made a post about the problems I've been having with my dell XPS13 9350.  At the end, I said that I ordered a new wifi card.
It came today and my laptop is fixed&#x2026;.sort of.  
The installation was easy, just pull off the back, pull the card out, put the new one in and reconnect the two antennae.  It took a bit of fiddling
to get it to work the first time, but this wasn't the cards fault.  The version of lubuntu I had on there disabled wifi so I really just spent 20
minutes looking for one option.  

After that it made sense that, because wifi was now working, I should try to throw gentoo on here and then everything will be perfect again.
I booted into the gentoo live cd and after one net-setup command, I had wifi and I was able to install the OS in about an hour or so (maybe 
20min of actual work since most of the time spent installing gentoo goes into waiting for compilations to finish).
The only problem was that I was running into the same issue as before.  The card was detected, running modprobe on iwlwifi did nothing, there 
nothing showed up in rfkill and, by all accounts it should have worked fine.  But it wasn't.  I'd run net-setup just like before and nothing
would happen.  All I would get was a connection error.  

On any other day, I might spend the time going through each kernel driver and try to figure out what was wrong, test out different solutions and
just poke around.  Not today though.  I'm just tired of dealing with gentoo installs that fail right at the end because of some obscure networking
issue.  I also got a 3D printer yesterday and my tolerance for more debugging is at an all time low.  I just don't have it in me to hunt down some
weird bug just to get gentoo working.  I have plans to eventually get gentoo on my laptop, but not now.  Not until I feel ready to suit up and 
dive in.  It might be a really simple problem that I solve in 20min or it could take a week.  I don't know and I'm not prepared to find out for 
another month or so.  

Since I need some kind of machine running linux (and I just want this thing to run *something* already) I decided to throw fedora on it for the 
time being.  I'm not a huge fan of the window manager/desktop manager.  I'd like either a more traditional desktop environment or some kind of 
tiling wm.  It's not bad though and it looks pretty slick. The small gripes I have with the layout are nothing compared to the fact that it 
all just kind of works out of the box.  I don't have to recompile the kernel if I want to use my bluetooth headset or wait a day just to install
firefox.  

Gentoo is great for customization and feeling like your OS is really *yours*, but the downside to that is that you have to really 
commit to using gentoo.  It's not something you can just throw on an old system and expect to be finished in 20min. If you can get through 
the install, you're left with a barebones system.  You've got to know what you need to get everything running.  If you run into a bug, the 
forums might help but usually you're on your own.  It's the wild west of linux.  If you want something, you've gotta do it yourself.  You
want audio?  Read the wiki article, follow the guide as best you can, recompile your kernel a few times and pray nothing goes wrong.  

I'm sure I'm in the minority here though.  Your best bet for an easy gentoo install is to go with one of the desktop profiles.  Choose the KDE
or xfce profile, wait a day after running `emerge -avuDN @world` and you should be good to go. Whenever I install gentoo, I always like to go
inimal on everything.  I'll usually just install Xorg and bspwm and add in anything else as needed.  This makes gentoo feel like a real sandbox
but it is also a hellish experience to get up and running.

I should also mention that using emacs on linux is a dream.  I've really only ever used emacs on my main windows laptop since I don't really have
a choice.  I do just about everything in emacs and there's a real difference when it's running on a linux machine.  Everything feels great and I'm
excited to use it even more than I already do.

This just turned into me rambling about gentoo.  Luckily my laptop is back in working order and I can actually start making stuff about linux and
bash scripting.  I'll figure something out. 

