---
layout: post
tags: non-project haskell
title: Something on Haskell
---


# Functional Programming

Functional programming has been a bit of a white whale for me for about a year now.
This seems like the typical experience though.  Someone will hear about functional
programming, look into it a bit, then get confused by all the werid new terms and
stick with imperative programming.  I'm not saying this from a position of
superiority, this is me right now.  I have little, if any functional programming
knowledge or experience. Though as I've dipped my toes into learning more about FP
I've noticed some very small things that *feel* FP-esq have crept into the way that
I think about approaching a problem.

Take this selection sort that I wrote a few days ago:

    def selectionSort(array):
        sort_index = 0
        while sort_index < len(array):
            idx_min = array.index(min(aray[sort_indx:]), sort_index, len(array))
            swap(sort_index, idx_min, array)
            sort_index += 1
        return array

While this certainly isn't the way selection sort would be written in Haskell
([Here's a blog post on that](https://adrians-blog.com/2020/08/02/selection-sort-building-a-basic-algorithm-in-haskell/)), nor is the implementation any more efficient,
readable, or useful than the normal way of doing it, it is definitely closer
to a functional style.

The more I learn about functional programming, the more interested I am in the
paradigm as a whole.  Because of that, I've recently collected a few solid
resources just to get started.  I imagine that starting out in functional
programming is similar to learning how to program for the first time, that's
what it's felt like for me.  There's just a lot of stuff that doesn't make
a whole lot of sense.


# Some Resources for getting started


## HackerRank, CodeWars, etc.

This is an idea that should not have taken me this long to think of.
One of the biggest problems I've had when trying to just get started with
Haskell is that I have no idea what I'm supposed to do with it.  I don't
know enough to build anything basic, but I know enough that I want to use
it for something.

This is where sites like HackerRank and CodeWars come in.  I've found it
extremely useful to go on one of those sites, sort the questions by difficulty,
and solve the ones that seem the easiest, and when I say easiest, I mean like
"sum the contents of an array" or "perform this conditional" easy.

The real benefit is that it provides *some* problem that needs to be solved.
Since the problems are so easy and designed for new programmers, you don't
have to think about the steps to solve it.  You can focus entirely on how
to solve the problem in a functional way, rather than trying to figure out
how to solve the problem in *any* way.

It's also really fun to know that the solution for a problem like "multiply
each element in a list by 2" in C is something like this:

    int
    multArray(int* arr, int len){
            int total = arr[0];

            for (int i = 1; i < len; ++i){
                    int total *= arr[i]
            }

            return total;
    }

Whereas in Haskell you get something like this:

    list_mult xs = foldl (*) 1 xs

Both return 120, but C has much more to setup and process than a simple one line
declaration in Haskell.  It feels so cheeky when you come up with a solution like that.


## YouTube courses and Resources

The one thing Haskell/FP isn't lacking is content.  There are so many good places to get
information about both the theory behind Haskell/FP and seeing it actually used.

One person I've found recently that's inspired me to give Haskell another go is Bartosz
Milewski.  He writes a lot about category theory, which is extremely useful to programming
as a whole.

-   He's got a full 20-hr course on category theory on YouTube ([Here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I8LbkfSSR58))
-   He runs a blog about programming, category theory and haskell
    ([Here](https://bartoszmilewski.com/)).  The one that was really interesting was the one posted
    yesterday about Factorio as a pseudo-functional programming language
    ([Here](https://bartoszmilewski.com/2021/02/16/functorio/))
-   There's also a great series by code<sub>report</sub> on YouTube where he works
    through different programming books.  Currently he's doing a series
    on Bartosz's *Category Theory for Programmers* ([Here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SmXB2K_5lcA))

There are also a lot of more practical tutorials on YouTube.  People will
record entire series of themselves building something complex in Haskell
and it's a great way to just see how Haskell/FP is being used.

-   I'm particularly interested in [this](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9AllRc64pVE) series about building a calculator
    in Haskell.  After building my own primative calculator in C, I think
    it would be extremely interesting to see how it's done (properly) in
    Haskell

-   There's also Tsoding's video series *HaskellRank* where he solves HackerRank
    problems in Haskell.  These are not only entertaining, but also useful to
    see how traditional algorithm problems are solved using Haskell.
    (Playlist [here](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLguYJK7ydFE4aS8fq4D6DqjF6qsysxTnx))

Hopefully this helped a little bit in learning more about Haskell.  I'm surely going
to keep messing around with it and seeing what more I can learn.
