---
layout: post
tags: non-project personal
title: Woe, Broadcom be upon ye
---

I haven't ever really talked about linux on here.  This might be a good time to do it, since I've had a particularly
difficult time working with my 2015 Dell XPS13 9350 and I think the major bug I've been trying to fix is pretty interesting.

I started getting into linux around the same time I started getting into programming.  I'd always heard about linux, but
never really cared much to try it.  I've always just used windows because it's got everything I need.  As I got more into
programming though, it made sense to try out linux.  That's what all the cool kids use, right?  I had also, naturally, run
into all the "i use arch btw" memes and decided that I too would like to use arch btw.  

I remember I got my laptop in the mail (my parents had to ship it to me since I was away at school) and I stayed up all night
installing arch.  It was a wild introduction to linux as a whole.  I went from having basically no experience, to having an
actual, functioning arch install.  Little did I know, this laptop would become a living nightmare to try and put linux on.  

You see, the XPS13 9350 is a sleek and slim "business professional" laptop priced at a hefty $1500.  I was swayed by the fanfare
of online reviews singing praise at this laptop.  I bought it thinking it would last me years and the $1500 was justified because
the hardware was powerful (or something).  In reality, this laptop (when it's running the stock Windows 10) is a hot piece of garbage.
Even after a solid upgrade to any flavor of Linux, it's still mediocre at best.  One of the two main issues with this laptop is that
the on-board graphics card is too puny to handle the fancy quad-HD screen.  This means that this laptop has a difficult time doing
anything that involves drawing to the screen. I remember it being alright with 1080p youtube videos, but trying to play even a simple
game like Football Manager would make for a terrible experience.  I've seen Football manager run on old macbook airs.  The fact that 
this (at the time) new $1500 laptop could barely play it was a bit telling.  Not only could it not play the simplest games, it would
also crash constantly when trying to edit videos, use photoshop or (god forbid) use blender.  It was a nightmare to use for anything
that wasn't writing on google docs or watching youtube videos.  The quad HD display is also an absolute mess with display scaling. 
Not only is this bad in linux, it was terrible in the default Windows 10.  I can't count the amount of times I needed to use a program
only to spend a day or so fiddling with window scaling settings just to be able to see the different buttons.  Sometimes this would work,
but more often than not, I'd be stuck with a program that I almost needed a magnifying glass to use.  

This brings us to the second issue.  The worse of the two. The Broadcom wifi card.  Never have I run into a worse piece of hardware to work
with.  This single tiny chip has made my life hell whenever I want to use linux on my laptop.  It first started with it needing a bit of
fiddling.  You'd have to maybe download some extra firmware or mess around with some drivers, but it was never terrible.  Even when I first
installed arch, it only took about an hour or two to get the wifi working.  Though as things went on, it only got worse.  

Eventually, memes aside, I settled on Gentoo as my distro of choice.  I originally wanted to see how hard the install process was, but ended
up loving the amount of control you have over everything on the system.  I really feel like I can make everything *mine* in gentoo.  Naturally, 
I wanted to migrate my laptop over to Gentoo.  When I first moved everything to Gentoo, I remember the wifi process being hellish but not because
of any hardware issue.  I was using the default netifrc when I really should have been using networkmanager.  I moved over to that and my problems
were gone.  Easy fix.  

Everything worked fine until I, stupidly, decided to try formatting the hard drive for a separate partition and ended up wiping out the main install (protip: don't use gparted
if you want to safely partition a hard drive with a working install on it).  I really should have known this wouldn't work, but it was one of those ideas
that seems really great until you're just about finished with it and then you realize it was a complete failure.  So I was off installing Gentoo
again on this laptop.  The install went off without a hitch (I'd done it so many god damn times by that point) except for one little problem, the base system 
couldn't connect to the internet.  What followed was about five different gentoo installs (all without any probem EXCEPT for this wifi problem) and about
two weeks of on-and-off kernel debugging.  It was a complete toss up of figuring out what drivers to enable, which ones to disable, which specific ports and
types of which driver to enable and disable, and it made no sense.  I don't even remember how I got it all working again.  Some magic combination
of kernel drivers must have fixed it.  It was a nightmare experience that I was just happy had ended.  

Recently though, I needed to reinstall gentoo to fix some updating problems.  I had left it sitting for a few months and the updates were failing randomly
and I didn't want to bother trying to remove KDE while also trying to figure out why some packages weren't updating.  
I wiped the OS and started fresh, thinking "Oh, I did it before, I know what I'm doing now.  It shouldn't be that bad." No it wasn't that bad, it was worse,
much worse. 

I should say that I had never had a problem getting internet in the livecd version of Gentoo.  I'd always just run "net-setup," click through the options and the internet
would be fine.  It was always the base system itself that had the problem.  With that being said, it came as a real surprise when I booted into the Gentoo live cd
and found that, after running net-setup, I had no internet.  The interface was active and detected, the brcmfmac driver was loaded, but for some reason, 
I couldn't get any internet.  I went through dmesg and found some scanning error.  Googled that and found nothing.  Everything I tried always lead to a dead end.
I tried going through with the install using a usb wifi card and thinking "maybe I just need to get all the right kernel drivers and firmware in place first." No,
I installed the system like normal, configured the kernel correctly and installed the firmware.  Nothing.  Everything was detected but there was still no internet.

This went on and on until I finally gave up and tried a different distro. "Maybe it's just Gentoo and I've lost my edge." Nope.  Fedora didn't detect the wifi
card, no internet at all.  I even tried it with Lubuntu, the easiest and most plug-n-play distro I could think of.  Nope,  still nothing.  It's not even detected.

I feel like I've tried everything at this point.  I even ordered a set of torx screwdrivers to open it up and swap it out with a different wifi card.  But no, none
of the wifi cards I had would fit.  Not even the one from my current 2019 laptop.  Nothing works with this laptop.  I've read that there were other revisions of this
laptop that have intel cards in them.  If I'd had that, I doubt I'd even be thinking about this problem. 

The last thing I can think of doing is going online and just buying a new m.2 wifi card.  The best option seems to be to try an intel card, but there's no guarantee
that it will fix anything.  I could end up with the same issues, except instead of dealing with brcmfmac, I'm dealing with iwlwifi.  
There's also the likely chance (given how everything seems to go with this laptop) that the bios rejects the card.  It's unlikely, but again, you never know with
these kinds of stupid laptops.  

Please, don't buy this garbage laptop and avoid broadcom wireless cards if you want to use linux. 

